Journal 3 Curric 277
For this journal I'm going to focus on writing about the shortcomings of noita and the possible ways it could be
improved in regards to game design concepts. 

First one of the biggest issues that Noita has in in regards to pacing
The beginning of every Noita run is extremely tedious, as you end up running around the mines area trying to min-max the
beginning of every run unless you get lucky and get a few good spells early on. 
This leads to a number of issues, mostly in that it takes a lot of time and a decent amount of good rng to start getting
into the late game. This also means that for new players, they end up spending an extended amount of time in the earlier
levels repeating already explored and mastered mechanics, while making it difficult for them to practice more in-depth
mechanics like wand-building and the alchemy system. 

Mechanics like wand-building and the alchemy system, while integral to the game, end up being gated by later progression
requiring more spells and more powerful wands in order to take advantage of both systems. The extended early game of
Noita and punishing nature of the game also means that much of your time will be spent repeating early-game mechanics,
unable to spend your time practicing late-game mechanics. 

This leads to an obviously frustrating gameplay-loop for beginners, but the design philosophy ultimately does support this type of
gameplay and it's eventually something that new players will have to learn and adapt to so I don't really know many ways
this could be changed without affecting the overall experience and design philosophy of the game.

Personally when going through the early game experience in my own runs, I found that even after a few hundred hours of
experience, only a few things changed in my runs in the early game in comparison to when I first started. Most
significantly is how consistently I can get to late-game, however the issue is that the time it takes me to progress
through the early game has always been around the same. I think that this is one of the biggest issues with the game,
the fact that every early game-run takes around 30 minutes or longer to start moving past early game spells and weak
wands. 

Currently I think it just takes too long for the player to progress into more interesting mechanics, and so one of the
changes I thought would be good is by simply increasing the variation of spells, by creating a lock-out system.
Currently the spread of spells you can acquire is randomized from a few pools of spells, categorized by tiers based on
their strength/difficulty. In the first few levels, spells and wands are restricted to the first tier of spells and wand
strengths. While I think this is fine, one of the biggest issues is that multiple of the same spell can drop in wands
throughout the first few levels. This often means that players will end up with duplicates of spells they don't need.
This is further exacerbated by the fact that spells are ranked on a rarity, and so more useful spells are further gateed
by rng. I think that a better way to introduce players to the spell system and speed up the early game is to guarantee
that the majority of spells within each tier can be found at least once in the levels that encompass that tier. 

Many times in my own runs even with lategame spells and wands, I'll find myself struggling to find one or two spells
that I need simply because they werent spawned in my world, and would require me to travel to parallel worlds which is
another considerably more difficult and potentially game-crashing endeavor.

Overall I think that some of the improvements that can be made to Noita center around early-game rng and consistency.
Like any roguelike, rng is a crucial aspect to the enjoyment within the game, but when it's too harsh like in Noita it
can lead to issues for beginners.
